Hi there.
This is the model.
Now let's look at static classes, which are also very useful.
Syntactically they are similar to non static member classes.
Only difference would be the addition of the modifier static in the class declaration.
However, they both are very different from each other.
As we will learn shortly, we will look at different use cases of static member classes and we will
also extend our demo further in this lecture.
Here is item 22 from affective java which says favor static classes over non static.
Now let's not get into the assumption that non static classes are less important.
As we saw earlier, they are useful for defining adapters.
It is just that when non static member classes are not required, we need to prefer static classes.
And here is the reason which is related to performance.
If we do not need access to the members of enclosing class object, then we should go with static member
classes.
That would mean we don't have to build a hidden reference to the enclosing object, which would obviously
save us time and space with non static motion.
We need to build a hidden reference to the enclosing object which would take up space and time and that
would allow us to access the members of the enclosing object.
A static middle class is simply a static member of the enclosing class.
And it means that it can be accessed without having an instance of the enclosing class, just like in
the case of a static field or a static method.
For instance, here is how a static field in a static member class can be accessed here.
Outer is the outer class name.
Static nested is name of the static member class within the outer.
And we are accessing some static field defined within the class, static nested.
So we access a static member class just like the way we access a static variable or a static method
via the class name.
And here is how you can create an instance of static.
Mr. Class.
We do not need an instance of the outer class to create an instance of the static member class.
If you recall, to create an instance of non static member class, we do need an object of its enclosing
class.
And from within the static member class, we can only access static members of the closing class.
And that's because it is a static member like a static method and hence cannot access any instance related
stuff in the outer class.
You can think of a static member class as just an ordinary class, but declared inside another class.
So like a regular class, it can include both static as well as instance members.
It can have instance members too as it can be instantiated without the help of the enclosing class object.
But keep in mind that though it can have instance members, it cannot access instance members of the
enclosing class.
Right.
Because it is a static member.
Like a regular class.
We can also make it non intangible by using it private constructor.
Another interesting part the use cases first is to represent private components of enclosing objects.
Second use case would be to represent strategies.
And third would be as public helper class.
And let's look at each of them.
You may recall the slide from our introduction lecture on nested classes.
This is about invoking the entry set method on a hash map instance and reset method would return the
set of all the key value pair mappings as entry instances, and each entry instance is represented by
the node nested class.
That is, each key value pair is stored in a node instance.
So the enclose object is using node instances to store its most basic data.
But a node instance by itself does not need access to any of the data in the enclosed object.
So it is defined as a static member class.
If it is defined as a non static member class, then there would be the additional cost of building
a hidden reference to the enclosing class object.
Although we are not using any of its members so we can avoid that by using a static member class.
So that's the first use case where a static member class is used to store the private members of an
enclosed object.
Now for the remaining two use cases, let's head over to our editor and see them in action.
Before we look at the last two use cases, I just wanted to show this once again.
So this is the hash map class.
And within the hash map class, we have the node class which implements the entry interface within map
interface.
And it stores the most basic data that is the key value pairs and it is declared as static.
Now had this been declared as non static, which means that we remove this keyword static, in which
case it would be a non static member class and it would unnecessarily include a hidden reference to
the enclosed object, which is the hash map instance.
So that is not needed at all because we don't need any access to the members of the hash map instance.
Right.
So this just stores the most basic data, which is the key and value of every entry instance.
So this is this should be declared as a static member class as mentioned in the effective item.
So that was the first use case.
Now let's go back to our cache class and bookmark and let's look at the second use case, which was
about using a static number class as a strategy.
Now in the demo of anonymous classes, we have invoked this sort method of arrays in order to sort the
sort the cache items, write the items in the cache and value.
And we defined an anonymous class here.
So we implemented a competitor and we had this compare method and we sorted by using grading.
Right?
Now we also said that if this is going to if this statement is going to be executed repeated repetitively,
then we can define this particular anonymous object in a static final field, like as like a singleton.
As a singleton.
And we said that it can be a private, static, final field.
And that was one of the things.
But sometimes we might want to implement multiple classes, multiple types.
In this case, using an anonymous class, we can only implement only this competitor interface.
But if we want to implement multiple, multiple types using using a nested class, then we can make
use of a static member class instead of an anonymous class.
Now, for example, this particular logic, this fun, this functionality, now it is inside cache,
but the bookmark, it can also be provided here in the bookmark class itself as a service to edge clients.
So bookmark is a class and and the owner of the bookmark class can include it as a service.
So this whole thing can be defined as a singleton within bookmark.
But if we want to, if we want to serialize bookmark, for example, a bookmark instance, then any
objects that are created here should also implement well.
So bookmark would be implementing serialize able.
But any objects that bookmark defines within within each class, they should also be realizable, otherwise
the realisable property would fail.
Right?
You may recall that from our chapter.
So we need an asset class which can implement both comparator as well as realizable.
And we cannot do that using an anonymous class because it can only implement one particular type.
So let's go ahead and define this as a service within bookmark.
So the bookmark bookmark class is providing an implementation of competitor as a service, but it will
also implement a realizable interface so we can make use of a static member class for that.
So we will define a public static final field there.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So it would return a competitor.
Now let's call it as.
Rating underscore competitor.
And let's define a private, static class, private, static asset class.
Its qualities rating competitor.
Now this would imply to implement competitor.
And also see realizable.
Okay.
So this is a static master class and all we can do is we can simply copy this logic here from this anonymous
class.
Okay.
So this static number class implements competitor and hence it also provides the definition for compare
method and it is also realisable now.
So the bookmark class can also be can also be realizable because if this is not realizable then then
a bookmark object cannot be serialized.
The entire object graph has to be any object in the object graph of bookmark has to implement realizable.
Every instance used within bookmark has to implement realizable.
So now all we do is so this is a private static class and we can expose it as a public static final
field.
So the static glass is hidden within within the bookmark class and it is exposed via this field reading
competitor.
So let's go back here and.
Sit.
Let's print the output one more time.
So let's go ahead and run this.
So it prints this output.
So it's just the same as the output of the anonymous class.
So that's how it is.
And this pattern is also used.
Within the string class.
String class also provides a static member class here called case insensitive competitor.
And as you can see, it implements competitor of string and the realizable interface.
And it is it's a private class, but it is exposing it using public static final field.
So it's exactly what we have just done.
And this is for case insensitive order within the string class.
You can take a look at it later.
So that's the pattern that they use.
So it is a strategy, but it is exposed in this way as a service.
Now, sometimes we might also have more.
We might want to expose more than one such competitors as a service, right?
In this case, it's just one of them.
Now, let's say we want to to also provide a competitor which sorts based on string length, length
of the string.
Then we have the second competitor.
So we can group them to group these two competitors using using in a static nested class.
So we can do that and provide it as a service so we can define a public static nested class for this
one is a private, so we can define a public static nested class.
And let's also do that.
So let me comment this cord here.
So that would be the third use case, which is as then public helper class.
So would provide these competitors as a service, as a helper to the client code.
It's called a competitor list because we are providing a list of competitors here.
So this is a public static master class.
And let's copy this code here.
So it would be yet another nested class here.
And let's make this public.
And let me copy this.
I have the second competitor here.
Because based on string lines.
Here it is, string length.
You don't have to.
Go this you can keep this also.
So this is.
Okay.
Now let's.
The scope of this.
We can just say new.
So this is sort of strange land, but it's also a static member class.
Let's access the competitor list.
And of the two let's make use of the string length competitor we are just using saying comparator list
got this.
So as you can see, we are not creating an instance of the enclosed object.
Right.
We said that that's possible with static class.
You don't need an instance of outward class.
So this is what we did.
And let me just go ahead and run it and here you go.
So this is the final comparator sorting by final comparator.
As you can see, this is an ascending order of the string.
And the previous one also was also static class, but it was by rating.
And we used the static final field for that.
Whereas here we have it as an as a public helper class and client clients can make use of this and we
can define more than one comparator here, so we can go ahead and define more competitors, too.
So that is one of the third use case.
So that's about it.
And this code is available in the static in the resources section.
And so this is static class.
And if we do not need non access to the enclosing object, then we should use a static number class.
So it would it would be more efficient as we do not have to create a hidden reference to the enclosed
object and it will save us time and space.
Thank you and happy coding.